% Checklist of Accepted Names for Alaskan Vascular Plants

# Checklist of Accepted Names for Alaskan Vascular Plants

<p><b>Query the checklist</b>. Enter your genus of interest here:</p><form method="get" action="../do"><input type="text" name="g" size ="20"/><input type="hidden" name="method" value="gquery"/>&#160;<input type="submit" value="go"/></form>

<br/>
<br/>
<hr/>

## Checklist Details

_(by D.F. Murray)_

### The list

The checklist of accepted names and synonyms for the vascular plants
of Alaska was developed over a period of years for in-house purposes
at the Herbarium of the University of Alaska Museum of the North
(ALA). It was intended to satisfy the pragmatic desire that each taxon
should be given one name when printing labels for new specimens and
for arranging the folders of specimens in the range. As a starting
point we were very fortunate to have Eric Hultén’s _Flora of Alaska
and Neighboring Territories_. But the checklist has had to be modified
repeatedly to reflect the changes we found and accepted in numerous
taxonomic revisions and monographs. It remains, and will always be, a
work in progress.

We provide synonyms for each accepted name. <!-- You can enter the
checklist with any one of the names commonly used in standard
references and be directed to our accepted name.  Family, genus, and
species are arranged alphabetically. --> Families, with respect to
included genera, have been brought into compliance with Angiosperm
Phylogeny Group (APG III). <!-- The checklist has been developed in
sections: gymnosperms; ferns and fern-allies; monocots; dicots. -->

The spelling of the authors for plant names and combinations follows
International Plant Names Index (IPNI). Names with the authority
replaced by auct. are misapplied names. For example: whereas _Erigeron
grandiflorus_ Hook. is a valid species name, the plant to which it is
correctly applied is not found in Alaska. Thus, when that binomial has
been used for Alaskan plants, it is a misapplication of the name,
which is recorded in the checklist as _Erigeron grandiflorus_ auct. non
Hook. The Alaskan plants are properly treated as _E. porsildii_ Nesom &
D. F. Murray.  Autonyms are given to distinguish infraspecific taxa of
the species when more than one is found in our area or in adjacent
regions.

### Acknowledgments

Alan Batten was the creator of our initial database before
off-the-shelf software was available. He entered most of the data, and
he has been guardian of the database prior to the development of
Arctos, the Museum’s on-line access to all collections.

Kanchi N. Gandhi (Harvard) has been our authority for nomenclature and
guide to solutions of nomenclatural problems.

The checklist is very much a collective effort in which Alan Batten,
Bruce Bennett, Matt Carlson, Reidar Elven, Jason Grant, Rob Lipkin,
Jordan Metzgar, Carolyn Parker, and Mary Stensvold have participated.
Alien plants have been taken from the list developed and maintained by
Matt Carlson at the Alaska Natural Heritage Program, University of
Alaska Anchorage.  That this checklist of accepted names exists is due
also to the persistent, gentle urgings and infinite patience of John
DeLapp, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Anchorage, who saw the need
for this checklist and urged that it be compiled. He has been
steadfast in his encouragement. He supplied some financial support too.

### Sources

Departures from the initial standard of Hultén’s taxonomy began even
before his entire account could be extracted. Taxonomy is dynamic, as
it should be, and revisions appear continuously, and it was our job to
extract from them and incorporate in our list of accepted names
changes that were well founded. Searches of the published literature
where not as easy as they are today, and surely we missed much. In
time we caught up, I believe.

Flora North America volumes are put on-line as soon as each is
completed at <http://floranorthamerica.org/>. We asses each new volume
carefully and add changes as warranted.

The PLANTS database (<http://plants.usda.gov>) is one of the best
known sources for North America for names and distribution maps; it is
the one used as the names standard by federal agencies. Its taxonomy
is that of John Kartesz, which often departs from our accepted names
list.

Journals from North American sources---colleges and universities,
public and private museums, herbaria, and botanical gardens---were
first to be examined. However, especially for boreal and arctic
floras, there is an extraterritorial trove of botanical research we
must evaluate.

_Flora Nordica_ is a multi-national effort by the Nordic countries,
with many parallels to _Flora of North America_, which will eventually
treat c. 4,600 species in several volumes.  Each volume
(general volume and numbers 1,2 and 6 have appeared as of this writing)
is a fine work, written by specialists, carefully edited, and
beautifully produced. The widely distributed boreal and arctic taxa
they treat are for the most part also found in Alaska, hence the
relevance of these volumes to Alaskan botany.

We believe that, historically speaking, at least one source, and a
major one at that, for the Alaskan flora lies in northeast Asia, even
farther west as far as the mountains of Central Asia (Middle Asia of
Russian botanists), therefore, it is crucial to have a good knowledge
of those floras. We are fortunate that there is a large, Russian
language literature. Unfortunately these floras typically have been
published in short runs and they become scarce soon after
issue. Treatments of note are the multi-volume floras: _Arctic Flora
USSR_ begun by A.I. Tolmachev, editor, and completed in 1987 under the
editorship of B. A. Yurtsev (for which they received the Lenin Prize);
_Vascular Plants of the Soviet Far East_ completed in 1996 under the
editorship of S. S. Kharkevich; _Flora of Siberia_ completed in 1997
under the editorship of L. I. Malyshev, I. M. Krasnoborov, and
G. A. Peshkova. English translations have been made for the _Arctic
Flora_ and for the _Flora of Siberia_. A very nice recent publication,
in Russian, is a _Conspectus of the Flora of Chukotka Tundra_ by
Yurtsev et al. (2010). It is a great summary of what is known.
Additionally there are Aleksandra Berkutenko’s _Flora and Vegetation
of the Magadan Oblast_ (2010) and (thanks to Lisa Strecker) a
_Catalogue of the Flora of Kamchatka_ by Yakubov and Chernyagina
(2004) both in Russian.

When consulting the Russian work one must determine which of their
names should be applied to our North American taxa. Does the same
taxon have different names here and in Russia; are two different taxa
subsumed under a single name? These questions are precisely what led
to the _Panarctic Flora Project_ (PAF),
begun as a bi-national effort (US-USSR) in the late 1980s at the
instigation of Boris Yurtsev to unify the Russian and North American
taxonomic traditions. He and I recognized the lack of perspective from
the North Atlantic, and fortunately in 1998 Reidar Elven was persuaded
to join and then lead and complete version 1.0 of the PAF project: an
annotated checlist. From his revision of Lid's _Flora of Norway_ in
1994 and again, magnificently, in 2004, his work with the Svalbard
flora (Elven and Elvebakk 1996), and his contributions to _Flora
Nordica_, Reidar has brought to PAF an encyclopedic view of the North
Atlantic, one greatly enlarged by his recent field experience in
arctic Canada, Alaska, the Russian Far East, and Sakha.

Murray and Yurtsev (1999) summarized PAF origins in a short paper in a
volume devoted to the entire project (Nordal and Razzhivin 1999). The
PAF checklist began with manuscript checklists provided by the same
team of Russian specialists at LE who had completed the excellent
Arctic Flora of the USSR. These drafts were edited and modified, and
the PAF checklist in its present form is very much the result of
herculean labor by Reidar who worked directly with Russian authors of
the draft checklist in St. Petersburg, distilled the essence from
those contributions, wrote incisive commentaries, and reviewed the
results with specialists at CAN, DAO, S, and many other
institutions. The PAF editorial committee (D.F. Murray,
V. Yu. Razzhivin, and Boris A. Yurtsev until his death in 2004) worked
with Reidar, the PAF Editor-in-Chief. The Panarctic Flora Checklist
(at <http://nhm2.uio.no/paf>) is a critical source of information for
the arctic taxa, and of course those data have been incorporated into
this checklist of Alaskan vascular plants.

In addition to the PAF Checklist for the Arctic there are two other
sources to be considered: _Flora of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago_
(<http://nature.ca/aaflora/data/>) and The _Flora of Svalbard_
(<http://svalbardflora.net/>). A new project, just begun with Canadian
leadership, is the _Arctic Flora of Canada and Alaska_ that is being
constructed from the ground up in a highly structured digital
environment for which the early contributions can be see on-line
(<http://arcticplants.myspecies.info/>).

